Update to the Context API documentation (#7565)
umbraco/UmbracoDocs: 16/umbraco-cms/customizing/foundation/context-api/consume-a-context.md

---
description: >-
  Learn how to consume contexts in Umbraco elements using one-time references
  or subscriptions to access data and functionality through the Context API.
---
# Consume a Context
There are two ways to consume a context: get a __one-time reference__ to the context, or get a __subscription__ for handling context changes. The Context API is a flexible system where contexts can get disconnected or replaced. A subscription allows for the handling of these changes. However, subscriptions use more resources. They are typically consumed in the constructor, a time when the computer is already processing a lot. Which way to go depends on your use case.

> A one-time reference is great for fire-and-forget events. The key here is that the context is not needed on initialization, but is only needed when a specific criteria is met. For instance, events that occur after user interaction or when a specific function is called. In that case, you just need to get a context, do something and forget about the context after that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A one-time reference approach is suitable for fire-and-forget events. The key here is that the context is not needed on initialization, but is only needed when a specific criteria is met. For instance, events that occur after user interaction or when a specific function is called. In that case, you need to get a context, do something and forget about the context after that.
```
Address ReviewDog warning.

If you need a context during initialization and you hold on to the context by putting it into a variable, you should always use a subscription. Otherwise you risk holding on to a context that could be disconnected or replaced without you knowing.

## Consuming contexts in an element
An [Umbraco Element](../umbraco-element/) is **any web component** that extends `UmbLitElement` or uses the `UmbElementMixin` to wrap its base class. Whether you're building with Lit, vanilla JavaScript, or any other web component framework, you can make it an Umbraco Element. This gives it full access to the Context API.

Umbraco Elements provide two methods for consuming contexts:

- **`getContext(token)`** - Retrieves a one-time reference to a context
- **`consumeContext(token, callback)`** - Creates a reactive subscription to a context

Both methods accept a Context Token (or string alias) to identify which context to consume.

### Get as one-time reference

> The first example uses Lit and that is the way Umbraco builds their elements. If you don't want to use Lit, there is also an example using vanilla Javascript. Both examples don't have any TypeScript specific code. You can use them in either a JavaScript or TypeScript file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first example uses Lit and that is the way Umbraco builds their elements. If you don't want to use Lit, there is also an example using vanilla JavaScript. Both examples don't have any TypeScript specific code. You can use them in either a JavaScript or TypeScript file.
```

Addresses ReviewDog warning

    }

    /** Notification handler for the notification button */
    async #notificationButtonClick() {
        
        //We try to get an instance of the context
        const notificationContext = await this.getContext(UMB_NOTIFICATION_CONTEXT);
        if (!notificationContext) {
            throw new Error('Notification context not found!');
        }
        
        notificationContext?.peek("positive", {
            data: {
                headline: "Success",
                message: "The notification button was clicked successfully!"
            }
        });

        //The notification is sent, now forget the context
    }
}

// Register the custom element
customElements.define('example-element', ExampleElement);
```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

### Get as a subscription
When you're dealing with a subscription, it's good practice to consume the context in the constructor for the following reasons:

* The constructor runs once when the element is created. This ensures your context subscription is set up before the element connects to the DOM. This guarantees you won't miss any context updates that occur during the element's initialization.

> * Context consumers created in the constructor are automatically connected when the element enters the DOM (`connectedCallback`). They are disconnected when it's removed (`disconnectedCallback`). You don't need to manually manage this lifecycle—Umbraco's controller system handles it for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Context consumers created in the constructor are automatically connected when the element enters the DOM (`connectedCallback`). They are disconnected when it's removed (`disconnectedCallback`). You don't need to manually manage this lifecycle as Umbraco's controller system handles it for you.
```

* By establishing context subscriptions in the constructor, your element's state is consistent from the moment it's created. This prevents race conditions where the element might render or perform actions before its required contexts are available.

> * Creating context consumers in the constructor is more efficient. This is more efficient than creating them in lifecycle methods that can be called multiple times. For example, `connectedCallback` fires every time the element is added to the DOM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Creating context consumers in the constructor is more efficient than creating them in lifecycle methods that are called multiple times. For example, `connectedCallback` fires every time the element is added to the DOM.
```

The first example uses Lit and that is the way Umbraco builds their elements. If you don't want to use Lit, there is also an HTML element example. Both examples don't have any TypeScript specific code. You can use them in either a JavaScript or TypeScript file.

{% tabs %}
{% tab title="Lit element" %}
```javascript
import { UmbLitElement } from '@umbraco-cms/backoffice/lit-element';
import { UMB_DOCUMENT_WORKSPACE_CONTEXT } from '@umbraco-cms/backoffice/document';

> //The example element extends the UmbLitElement (which is the same as UmbElementMixin(LitElement))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// The example element extends the UmbLitElement (which is the same as UmbElementMixin(LitElement))
```

> //This gives us all the helpers we need to get or consume contexts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// This gives us all the helpers we need to get or consume contexts
```

```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

## Consuming contexts in non-UI elements
Not all code that needs contexts lives in UI elements (web components). Services, managers, repositories, and helper classes often need access to contexts. These may include notifications, workspaces, or application state. However, they don't exist as elements in the DOM.

For these non-UI classes, extend `UmbControllerBase` to gain the same context consumption capabilities as elements. This base class provides `getContext()` and `consumeContext()` methods. This allows any class with a controller host to access the Context API.

### Get as one-time reference
This example creates an example service that can show a notification in the backoffice of Umbraco based on the given text.

```javascript
import { UmbControllerBase } from '@umbraco-cms/backoffice/class-api';
import { UMB_NOTIFICATION_CONTEXT } from '@umbraco-cms/backoffice/notification';

// This service class extends UmbControllerBase
// This gives us access to getContext() and consumeContext()
export default class ExampleService extends UmbControllerBase {
    async showNotification(notificationText) {
        

>         //We try to get an instance of the context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // We try to get an instance of the context
```

        const notificationContext = await this.getContext(UMB_NOTIFICATION_CONTEXT);
        if (!notificationContext) {
            throw new Error('Notification context not found!');
        }
        
        notificationContext?.peek("positive", {
            data: {
                headline: "Success",
                message: notificationText
            }
        });

>         //The notification is sent, now forget the context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // The notification is sent, now forget the context
```

```javascript
import { UmbContextConsumer } from '@umbraco-cms/backoffice/context-api';
import { UMB_DOCUMENT_WORKSPACE_CONTEXT } from '@umbraco-cms/backoffice/document';

export class DocumentService {
    #workspaceContext;
    #workspaceContextConsumer;

    constructor(hostElement) {
        // Manually create the context consumer
        this.#workspaceContextConsumer = new UmbContextConsumer(
            hostElement,
            UMB_DOCUMENT_WORKSPACE_CONTEXT,
            (context) => {
                if (context) {
                    console.log("I've got the document workspace context: ", context);
                    this.#workspaceContext = context;
                } else {
                    console.log("The document workspace context is gone, I will make sure my code disassembles properly.");
                    this.#workspaceContext = null;
                }
            }
        );
        
        // Manually trigger the connection

>         this.#workspaceContextConsumer.hostConnected();

Author: I've updated the examples!

---
description: >-
  Learn how to consume contexts in Umbraco elements using one-time references
  or subscriptions to access data and functionality through the Context API.
---
# Consume a Context
There are two ways to consume a context: get a __one-time reference__ to the context, or get a __subscription__ for handling context changes. The Context API is a flexible system where contexts can get disconnected or replaced. A subscription allows for the handling of these changes. However, subscriptions use more resources. They are typically consumed in the constructor, a time when the computer is already processing a lot. Which way to go depends on your use case.

A one-time reference approach is suitable for fire-and-forget events. The key here is that the context is not needed on initialization, but is only needed when a specific criteria is met. For instance, events that occur after user interaction or when a specific function is called. In that case, you need to get a context, do something and forget about the context after that.

> If you need a context during initialization which is then set as a variable, you should always use a subscription. Otherwise you risk holding on to a context that could be disconnected or replaced without you knowing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you need a context during initialization which is then set as a variable, you should always use a subscription. Otherwise, you risk holding on to a context that could be disconnected or replaced without you knowing.
```

            return;
        
        this.shadowRoot.innerHTML = `
            <uui-button look="primary" color="default" id="notificationButton">
                Click me for a notification!
            </uui-button>
        `;
        
        const button = this.shadowRoot.querySelector('#notificationButton');
        button?.addEventListener('click', this.#notificationButtonClick.bind(this));
    }

    /** Notification handler for the notification button */
    async #notificationButtonClick() {
        
        //We try to get an instance of the context
        const notificationContext = await this.getContext(UMB_NOTIFICATION_CONTEXT);
        if (!notificationContext) {
            throw new Error('Notification context not found!');
        }
        
        notificationContext?.peek("positive", {
            data: {
                headline: "Success",
                message: "The notification button was clicked successfully!"
            }
        });

        //The notification is sent, now forget the context
    }
}

// Register the custom element
customElements.define('example-element', ExampleElement);
```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

### Get as a subscription

> When you're dealing with a subscription, it's good practice to consume the context in the constructor for the following reasons:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you are dealing with a subscription, it is good practice to consume the context in the constructor for the following reasons:
```

> * The constructor runs once when the element is created. This ensures your context subscription is set up before the element connects to the DOM. This guarantees you won't miss any context updates that occur during the element's initialization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The constructor runs once when the element is created. This ensures your context subscription is set up before the element connects to the DOM. This guarantees you will not miss any context updates that occur during the element's initialization.
```

> * Context consumers created in the constructor are automatically connected when the element enters the DOM (`connectedCallback`). They are disconnected when it's removed (`disconnectedCallback`). You don't need to manually manage this lifecycle as Umbraco's controller system handles it for you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Context consumers created in the constructor are automatically connected when the element enters the DOM (`connectedCallback`). They are disconnected when it is removed (`disconnectedCallback`). You do not need to manually manage this lifecycle as Umbraco's controller system handles it for you.
```

// This service class extends UmbControllerBase
// This gives us access to getContext() and consumeContext()
export class ExampleService extends UmbControllerBase {
    #workspaceContext;

    constructor(host) {
        super(host);
        
        // Subscribe to the document workspace context
        this.consumeContext(UMB_DOCUMENT_WORKSPACE_CONTEXT, (context) => {
            if (context) {
                console.log("I've got the document workspace context: ", context);
                this.#workspaceContext = context;
            } else {
                console.log("The document workspace context is gone, I will make sure my code disassembles properly.")
                this.#workspaceContext = null;
            }
        });
    }
}
```

## Manual context control
In rare cases, you may need complete manual control over context consumption. This means not extending `UmbControllerBase` or using element mixins. This is typically necessary when:

- Integrating with third-party libraries or frameworks
- Working with legacy code that can't be refactored
- Building custom architectural patterns outside Umbraco's standard controller system

> For these scenarios, use `UmbContextConsumer` directly. This low-level API gives you full control but requires manual lifecycle management. You must call `hostConnected()`, `hostDisconnected()`, and `destroy()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For these scenario's, use `UmbContextConsumer` directly. This low-level API gives you full control but requires manual lifecycle management. You must call `hostConnected()`, `hostDisconnected()`, and `destroy()`.
```
